`v0.19.0` release notes (#1852)
PennyLaneAI/pennylane: doc/releases/changelog-0.19.0.md

                       [0.0000000000, 0.0000000000, 2.0]], requires_grad=True)

  mol = qml.hf.Molecule(symbols, geometry)

  dev = qml.device("default.qubit", wires=4)
  params = [np.array([0.0], requires_grad=True)]

  def generate_circuit(mol):
      @qml.qnode(dev)
      def circuit(*args):
          qml.BasisState(np.array([1, 1, 0, 0]), wires=[0, 1, 2, 3])
          qml.DoubleExcitation(*args[0][0], wires=[0, 1, 2, 3])
          return qml.expval(qml.hf.generate_hamiltonian(mol)(*args[1:]))
      return circuit

  for n in range(25):

      mol = qml.hf.Molecule(symbols, geometry)
      args = [params, geometry] # initial values of the differentiable parameters

      g_params = qml.grad(generate_circuit(mol), argnum = 0)(*args)
      params = params - 0.5 * g_params[0]

      forces = qml.grad(generate_circuit(mol), argnum = 1)(*args)
      geometry = geometry - 0.5 * forces

      print(f'Step: {n}, Energy: {generate_circuit(mol)(*args)}, Maximum Force: {forces.max()}')
  ```
  In addition, the new Hartree-Fock solver can further be used to optimize the
  basis set parameters. For details, please refer to the [page on using the
  differentiable Hartree-Fock

>   solver](https://pennylane.readthedocs.io/en/latest/code/qml_hf.html#using-the-differentiable-hf-solver).

Author: Being added in https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/1839.

Reviewer: For some reason GitHub won't let me make a suggestion, but I recommend changing it to
```markdown
For details, please refer to the [differentiable Hartree-Fock
solver documentation](https://pennylane.readthedocs.io/en/latest/code/qml_hf.html#using-the-differentiable-hf-solver).
```

Author: Updated, thank you.

  created function.
  The stopping criterion must take a queuable object and return a boolean.

* A new transform, `@qml.batch_params`, has been added, that makes QNodes
  handle a batch dimension in trainable parameters.
  [(#1710)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/1710)
  [(#1761)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/1761)

  This transform will create multiple circuits, one per batch dimension.
  As a result, it is both simulator and hardware compatible.

  ```python
  @qml.batch_params
  @qml.beta.qnode(dev)
  def circuit(x, weights):
      qml.RX(x, wires=0)
      qml.RY(0.2, wires=1)
      qml.templates.StronglyEntanglingLayers(weights, wires=[0, 1, 2])
      return qml.expval(qml.Hadamard(0))
  ```

  The `qml.batch_params` decorator allows us to pass arguments `x` and `weights`
  that have a batch dimension. For example,

  ```pycon
  >>> batch_size = 3
  >>> x = np.linspace(0.1, 0.5, batch_size)
  >>> weights = np.random.random((batch_size, 10, 3, 3))
  ```

  If we evaluate the QNode with these inputs, we will get an output
  of shape ``(batch_size,)``:

  ```pycon
  >>> circuit(x, weights)
  tensor([[0.16804   ],
          [0.2519191 ],

>           [0.04035688]], requires_grad=True)

Author: This has been changed from:
```
   >>> circuit(x, weights)
   [-0.30773348  0.23135516  0.13086565]
```
Used the following to get the output:
```python
dev = qml.device("default.qubit", wires=3)

@qml.batch_params
@qml.beta.qnode(dev)
def circuit(x, weights):
    qml.RX(x, wires=0)
    qml.RY(0.2, wires=1)
    qml.templates.StronglyEntanglingLayers(weights, wires=[0, 1, 2])
    return qml.expval(qml.Hadamard(0))

batch_size = 3
x = np.linspace(0.1, 0.5, batch_size)
weights = np.random.random((batch_size, 10, 3, 3))
circuit(x, weights)
```

Author: This has been updated in https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/1852/commits/f1ecfcaf3aa00b871f39fbeb99bdff659c71f792 as per the changes to the output of `batch_params` coming up in #1860.

    device at execution time. While this may lead to a slight increase in classical processing,
    it significantly reduces the number of circuit evaluations needed to compute
    gradients of complex unitaries.

  In an upcoming release, this QNode will replace the existing one. If you come across any bugs
  while using this QNode, please let us know via a [bug
  report](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/issues/new?assignees=&labels=bug+%3Abug%3A&template=bug_report.yml&title=%5BBUG%5D)
  on our GitHub bug tracker.

  Currently, this beta QNode does not support the following features:

  - Non-mutability via the `mutable` keyword argument
  - Viewing specifications with `qml.specs`
  - The `reversible` QNode differentiation method
  - The ability to specify a `dtype` when using PyTorch and TensorFlow.

  It is also not tested with the `qml.qnn` module.

* Support for differentiable execution of batches of circuits has been
  extended to the JAX interface for scalar functions, via the beta
  `pennylane.interfaces.batch` module.
  [(#1634)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/1634)

>   [(#1685)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/1685)

Reviewer: Up to you antal, but this could potentially also go in improvements! I'll leave this as your call :)

  dev = qml.device('default.qubit', wires=qubits)

  @qml.qnode(dev)
  def ansatz(weights):
      qml.templates.GateFabric(weights, wires=[0,1,2,3],
                                  init_state=ref_state, include_pi=True)
      return qml.expval(H)
  ```

  For more details, see the [GateFabric documentation](../code/api/pennylane.templates.layers.GateFabric.html).

* Added a new template `kUpCCGSD`, which implements a unitary coupled cluster ansatz with
  generalized singles and pair doubles excitation operators, proposed by Joonho Lee *et al.*
  in [arXiv:1810.02327](https://arxiv.org/abs/1810.02327).
  [(#1743)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/1743)

  An example of a circuit using `kUpCCGSD` template is:

  ```python
  coordinates = np.array([0.0, 0.0, -0.6614, 0.0, 0.0, 0.6614])
  H, qubits = qml.qchem.molecular_hamiltonian(["H", "H"], coordinates)
  ref_state = qml.qchem.hf_state(electrons=2, orbitals=qubits)

  dev = qml.device('default.qubit', wires=qubits)

  @qml.qnode(dev)
  def ansatz(weights):
      qml.templates.kUpCCGSD(weights, wires=[0,1,2,3], k=0, delta_sz=0,
                                  init_state=ref_state)
      return qml.expval(H)
  ```

> <h4>Improved utilities across the entire code base</h4>

Reviewer: Do you think something like?
```suggestion
<h4>Improved utilities for quantum compilation and characterization</h4>
```

Things like device expansion fit into compilation, and the Fourer module fits into characterization :)

Reviewer: @antalszava just in case you missed this one :)

* Two new methods were added to the Device API, allowing PennyLane devices
  increased control over circuit decompositions.
  [(#1651)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/1651)

  - `Device.expand_fn(tape) -> tape`: expands a tape such that it is supported by the device. By
    default, performs the standard device-specific gate set decomposition done in the default
    QNode. Devices may overwrite this method in order to define their own decomposition logic.

    Note that the numerical result after applying this method should remain unchanged; PennyLane
    will assume that the expanded tape returns exactly the same value as the original tape when
    executed.

  - `Device.batch_transform(tape) -> (tapes, processing_fn)`: preprocesses the tape in the case
    where the device needs to generate multiple circuits to execute from the input circuit. The
    requirement of a post-processing function makes this distinct to the `expand_fn` method above.

    By default, this method applies the transform

>     .. math:: \left\langle \sum_i c_i h_i\right\rangle -> \sum_i c_i \left\langle h_i \right\rangle

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    .. math:: \left\langle \sum_i c_i h_i\right\rangle → \sum_i c_i \left\langle h_i \right\rangle
```

  in `ops/qubit/attributes.py`, but the class can also be used to create your own. For
  example, we can create a new Attribute, `pauli_ops`, like so:

  ```pycon
  >>> from pennylane.ops.qubit.attributes import Attribute
  >>> pauli_ops = Attribute(["PauliX", "PauliY", "PauliZ"])
  ```

  We can check either a string or an Operation for inclusion in this set:

  ```pycon
  >>> qml.PauliX(0) in pauli_ops
  True
  >>> "Hadamard" in pauli_ops
  False
  ```

  We can also dynamically add operators to the sets at runtime. This is useful
  for adding custom operations to the attributes such as `composable_rotations`
  and ``self_inverses`` that are used in compilation transforms. For example,
  suppose you have created a new Operation, `MyGate`, which you know to be its
  own inverse. Adding it to the set, like so

  ```pycon
  >>> from pennylane.ops.qubit.attributes import self_inverses
  >>> self_inverses.add("MyGate")
  ```

  will enable the gate to be considered by the `cancel_inverses` compilation
  transform if two such gates are adjacent in a circuit.

* The new `qml.fourier.qnode_spectrum` function extends the former

>   `qml.fourier.spectrum` function

Reviewer: Let's move this one to the top of this section :) it is the most exciting

  parameters, we obtain:

  ```pycon
  >>> spec = qml.fourier.qnode_spectrum(circuit, encoding_args={"x", "y", "z"})(x, y, z, w)
  >>> for inp, freqs in spec.items():
  ...     print(f"{inp}: {freqs}")
  "x": {(0,): [-0.5, 0.0, 0.5], (1,): [-0.5, 0.0, 0.5], (2,): [-0.5, 0.0, 0.5]}
  "y": {(0,): [-2.3, 0.0, 2.3], (1,): [-2.3, 0.0, 2.3], (2,): [-2.3, 0.0, 2.3]}
  "z": {(): [-3.0, -2.0, -1.0, 0.0, 1.0, 2.0, 3.0]}
  ```

  We can see that all three parameters in the QNode arguments ``x`` and ``y``
  contribute the spectrum of a Pauli rotation ``[-1.0, 0.0, 1.0]``, rescaled with the
  prefactor of the respective parameter in the circuit.
  The three ``RX`` rotations using the parameter ``z`` accumulate, yielding a more
  complex frequency spectrum.

  For details on how to control for which parameters the spectrum is computed,
  a comparison to `qml.fourier.circuit_spectrum`, and other usage details, please see the
  [fourier.qnode_spectrum docstring](https://pennylane.readthedocs.io/en/latest/code/api/pennylane.fourier.qnode_spectrum.html).

* There is a new utility function `qml.math.is_independent` that checks whether
  a callable is independent of its arguments.

>   [(#1700)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/1700)

Reviewer: Let's move this one to improvements :)

>   **Warning**
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

>   This function is experimental and might behave differently than expected.
>   Also, it might be subject to change.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  This function is experimental and might behave differently than expected.
```

>   **Disclaimer**
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

  Note that the test relies on both numerical and analytical checks, except
  when using the PyTorch interface which only performs a numerical check.
  It is known that there are edge cases on which this test will yield wrong
  results, in particular non-smooth functions may be problematic.
  For details, please refer to the
  [is_indpendent docstring](https://pennylane.readthedocs.io/en/latest/code/api/pennylane.math.is_independent.html).

> <h3>Improvements</h3>

Reviewer: @antalszava it might be good to also order this one! I have a rough order suggestion here:

1. The `qml.metric_tensor` transform has been improved with regards to both function and performance
2. The `ApproxTimeEvolution` template can now be used with Hamiltonians that have trainable coefficients.
3. Quantum function transforms and batch transforms can now be applied to devices. 
4. It is now possible to draw QNodes that have been transformed by a ‘batch transform’
5. All qubit operations have been re-written to use the qml.math framework
6. The use of expval(H), where H is a cost Hamiltonian generated by the qaoa module, has been sped up.
7. Operations can now have gradient recipes that depend on the state of the operation. 
8. Shots can now be passed as a runtime argument to transforms that execute circuits in batches, similarly to QNodes.
9. All others (order not so important)

I tried to prioritize those that have code examples, border on new user functionality, sound exciting, or specifying a performance improvement!

Feel free to make any order suggestions you think make sense.

Author: Changed the order :+1: Brought one of the metric tensor updates to the front to go with 1.

Reviewer: @antalszava I don't see the new order 🤔 Have you pushed local changes?

Author: Not sure why the docs were off (also saw that they rendered the the outdated order), now they are definitely okay :thinking:

    ...     qml.RY(x[1] ** 2, wires=1)
    ...     qml.RY(x[1], wires=0)
    ...     return qml.expval(qml.PauliZ(0))
    >>> x = np.array([0.1, 0.2], requires_grad=True)
    >>> qml.metric_tensor(circuit)(x)
    array([[0.25      , 0.        ],
           [0.        , 0.28750832]])
    ```

    To revert to the previous behaviour of returning the metric tensor with respect to gate
    arguments, `qml.metric_tensor(qnode, hybrid=False)` can be passed.

    ```pycon
    >>> qml.metric_tensor(circuit, hybrid=False)(x)
    array([[0.25      , 0.        , 0.        ],
           [0.        , 0.25      , 0.        ],
           [0.        , 0.        , 0.24750832]])
    ```

  - The metric tensor transform now works with a larger set of operations. In particular,
    all operations that have a single variational parameter and define a generator are now
    supported. In addition to a reduction in decomposition overhead, the change
    also results in fewer circuit evaluations.

* ``qml.circuit_drawer.CircuitDrawer`` can accept a string for the ``charset`` keyword, instead of a ``CharSet`` object.
  [(#1640)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/1640)

> * ``qml.math.sort`` will now return only the sorted torch tensor and not the corresponding indices, making sort consistent across interfaces.
>     [(#1691)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/1691)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* ``qml.math.sort`` will now return only the sorted torch tensor and not the corresponding indices, making sort consistent across interfaces.
  [(#1691)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/1691)
```

* The utility function `qml.math.requires_grad` now returns `True` when using Autograd
  if and only if the `requires_grad=True` attribute is set on the NumPy array. Previously,
  this function would return `True` for *all* NumPy arrays and Python floats, unless
  `requires_grad=False` was explicitly set.
  [(#1638)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/1638)

* The operation `qml.Interferometer` has been renamed `qml.InterferometerUnitary` in order to
  distinguish it from the template `qml.templates.Interferometer`.
  [(#1714)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/1714)

* The `qml.transforms.invisible` decorator has been replaced with `qml.tape.stop_recording`, which
  may act as a context manager as well as a decorator to ensure that contained logic is
  non-recordable or non-queueable within a QNode or quantum tape context.
  [(#1754)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/1754)

* Templates `SingleExcitationUnitary` and `DoubleExcitationUnitary` have been renamed
  to `FermionicSingleExcitation` and `FermionicDoubleExcitation`, respectively.
  [(#1822)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/1822)

<h3>Deprecations</h3>

> * The `default.tensor` device from the beta folder has not been maintained in
>   years and is deprecated. It will be removed in future releases.
>   [(#1851)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/1851)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The `default.tensor` device from the beta folder is no longer maintained
  and has been deprecated. It will be removed in future releases.
  [(#1851)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/1851)
```

  [(#1724)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/1724)

* Updates the 'Gradients and training' quickstart guide to provide information
  on gradient transforms.
  [(#1751)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/1751)

* All instances of `qnode.draw()` have been updated to instead use the
  transform `qml.draw(qnode)`.
  [(#1750)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/1750)

* Add the `jax` interface in QNode Documentation.
  [(#1755)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/1755)

* Reorganized all the templates related to quantum chemistry under a common
  header `Quantum Chemistry templates`.
  [(#1822)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/1822)

<h3>Contributors</h3>

This release contains contributions from (in alphabetical order):

Juan Miguel Arrazola, Utkarsh Azad, Akash Narayanan B, Sam Banning, Thomas
Bromley, Jack Ceroni, Alain Delgado, Olivia Di Matteo, Andrew Gardhouse,
Anthony Hayes, Theodor Isacsson, David Ittah, Josh Izaac, Soran Jahangiri,
Christina Lee, Romain Moyard, Lee James O'Riordan, Carrie-Anne Rubidge, Maria
Schuld, Rishabh Singh, Jay Soni, Ingrid Strandberg, Antal Száva, Teresa

> Tamayo-Mendoza, Rodrigo Vargas, Cody Wang, David Wierichs, Moritz Willmann.

Reviewer: Amazing!

  ```
  In addition, the new Hartree-Fock solver can further be used to optimize the
  basis set parameters. For details, please refer to the [page on using the
  differentiable Hartree-Fock
  solver](https://pennylane.readthedocs.io/en/latest/code/qml_hf.html#using-the-differentiable-hf-solver).

<h4>Integration with Mitiq</h4>

* Error mitigation using the zero-noise extrapolation method is now available through the
  `transforms.mitigate_with_zne` transform. This transform can integrate with the
  [Mitiq](https://mitiq.readthedocs.io/en/stable/) package for unitary folding and extrapolation
  functionality.
  [(#1813)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/1813)

  Consider the following noisy device:

  ```python
  import pennylane as qml

  noise_strength = 0.05

  dev = qml.device("default.mixed", wires=2)
  dev = qml.transforms.insert(qml.AmplitudeDamping, noise_strength)(dev)
  ```

  We can mitigate the effects of this noise for circuits run on this device by using the added
  transform:

  ```python
  from pennylane import numpy as np
  from pennylane.beta import qnode

> 

Author: Done, thanks :)

  from mitiq.zne.scaling import fold_global
  from mitiq.zne.inference import RichardsonFactory

  n_wires = 2
  n_layers = 2

  shapes = qml.SimplifiedTwoDesign.shape(n_wires, n_layers)
  np.random.seed(0)
  w1, w2 = [np.random.random(s) for s in shapes]

  @qml.transforms.mitigate_with_zne([1, 2, 3], fold_global, RichardsonFactory.extrapolate)
  @qnode(dev)
  def circuit(w1, w2):
      qml.SimplifiedTwoDesign(w1, w2, wires=range(2))
      return qml.expval(qml.PauliZ(0))
  ```

  Now, executing `circuit` will be mitigated:

  ```pycon
  >>> circuit(w1, w2)
  0.19113067083636542
  ```

> <h4>Powerful new transforms</h4>

Author: Thank, updated!

  dev = qml.device("default.mixed", wires=2)

  @qml.qnode(dev)
  @insert(qml.AmplitudeDamping, 0.2, position="end")
  def f(w, x, y, z):
      qml.RX(w, wires=0)
      qml.RY(x, wires=1)
      qml.CNOT(wires=[0, 1])
      qml.RY(y, wires=0)
      qml.RX(z, wires=1)
      return qml.expval(qml.PauliZ(0) @ qml.PauliZ(1))
  ```

  Executions of this circuit will differ from the noise-free value:

  ```pycon
  >>> f(0.9, 0.4, 0.5, 0.6)
  tensor(0.754847, requires_grad=True)
  >>> print(qml.draw(f)(0.9, 0.4, 0.5, 0.6))
   0: ──RX(0.9)──╭C──RY(0.5)──AmplitudeDamping(0.2)──╭┤ ⟨Z ⊗ Z⟩
   1: ──RY(0.4)──╰X──RX(0.6)──AmplitudeDamping(0.2)──╰┤ ⟨Z ⊗ Z⟩
  ```

* Common tape expansion functions are now available in `qml.transforms`,
  alongside a new `create_expand_fn` function for easily creating expansion functions
  from stopping criteria.
  [(#1734)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/1734)
  [(#1760)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/1760)

  `create_expand_fn` takes the default depth to which the expansion function
  should expand a tape, a stopping criterion, an optional device, and a docstring to be set for the
  created function.

>   The stopping criterion must take a queuable object and return a boolean.

Reviewer: Should we add a small example here?

> For example, to create an expansion function that decomposes all trainable, multi-parameter operations:

```python
>>> stop_at = ~(qml.operation.has_multipar & qml.operation.is_trainable)
>>> expand_fn = qml.transforms.create_expand_fn(depth=5, stop_at=stop_at)
```

> The created expansion function can be used within a custom transform.
> Devices can also be provided, producing expansion functions that decompose tapes to support the native gate set of the device.

    will be packaged into a single job for execution on the device. This can lead to
    significant performance improvement when executing the QNode on remote
    quantum hardware.

  - When decomposing the circuit, the default decomposition strategy will prioritize
    decompositions that result in the smallest number of parametrized operations
    required to satisfy the differentiation method. Additional decompositions required
    to satisfy the native gate set of the quantum device will be performed later, by the
    device at execution time. While this may lead to a slight increase in classical processing,
    it significantly reduces the number of circuit evaluations needed to compute
    gradients of complex unitaries.

  In an upcoming release, this QNode will replace the existing one. If you come across any bugs
  while using this QNode, please let us know via a [bug
  report](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/issues/new?assignees=&labels=bug+%3Abug%3A&template=bug_report.yml&title=%5BBUG%5D)
  on our GitHub bug tracker.

  Currently, this beta QNode does not support the following features:

  - Non-mutability via the `mutable` keyword argument

>   - Viewing specifications with `qml.specs`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
